This is session 111, Writing Threaded
Applications for Mac OS X.
As you know,
writing a threaded application is one
way that you can maximize resources
and performance on any system,
whether it's a single or dual processor.
This session will go over a
lot of the tips and tricks,
the do's and don'ts of writing a
threaded application and why you
would want to do it and times when
you wouldn't want to write a thread.
So hopefully you've been able
to take a look at the resources
online at the developer site.
This session will supplant a lot of
that information and I'd like to bring
up George Warner who will deliver
the presentation this afternoon.
Thank you.
Before I get off this slide,
I just want to touch on my new job title.
Some people have noticed, asked me about.
For any of you that don't know,
I'm the engineer formerly known as the
Mixed Mode Magic Fragment Scientist.
For obvious reasons,
those technologies have
kind of faded out somewhat.
So people have asked,
suggested that I update my job title.
Excuse me.
So the Schizophrenic
Optimization Scientist now.
A little debate over whether
it should be plural or not,
but...
So the agenda will be
covering some terminologies.
There's some main conflicts in
some of the threading models.
The why, the why not.
We'll be covering
different architectures,
talk about the do's and the don'ts.
We'll be doing some demos and
then we'll break for some Q&As.
So the original thread manager was
a cooperative thread manager and
everything was scheduled cooperatively
and we referred to it threads.
When we came out with the
MP implementation in 8.6,
we didn't want to call them
threads so we called them task.
Now we're running on a Unix
system where everybody knows
what a task is and there's a bit
of a clash in the naming space.
So for the purpose of
today's presentation,
when I'm talking about a thread,
we're talking about an MP.
It's an independent path of execution.
Everybody is pretty much
up on what a thread is.
When I talk about a process,
it's a collection of
threads plus the resources,
basically an application
or a task that's running.
In the Unix world, you'd call it a task,
but I have a tendency
to call it a process.
And I want to point out multiprocessing
is a general case of multitasking.
Back in 8.6 when we introduced all this,
a lot of people I'd suggest, well,
why don't you use an MP thread?
And they go, well,
I don't have a MP thread.
I have an MP box.
And it took me a while to
educate the market and make them
understand that multithreading
really doesn't have anything to
do with multiprocessing per se.
There's just advantages that if
you do have another processor,
the multithreading API can help
you take advantage of that.
So why use threads?
There's a customer expectation
that your application is
going to be very responsive,
that when I click a button
something's going to happen.
And there's nothing worse than when
you get the little spinning beach ball.
Scalability.
Like I said earlier, if you actually have
a dual processor box,
customers really want to see
both processors getting utilized.
So if you write your code threaded,
there's a better chance that
those second processor resources
will be getting utilized.
So, way back when I first started
working on the MP stuff,
these benchmark numbers came
out and they keep getting
regurgitated and reused every year.
Anybody that's come to a previous
session has seen these numbers.
The really interesting
number there is the top one.
On a dual processor box,
we went to 2.3 and everybody goes,
wait a minute,
how can you get better than
two times the performance?
You only got twice the horsepower.
And that's exactly what I thought
when the first time I ran the numbers,
so I ran the numbers again.
And when I went and analyzed
the numbers and tried to
figure out what was going on,
what we finally determined was we
don't just have twice the processors,
we also have twice the cache.
So, our data job just happened to not
quite fit well in a single processor,
one megabyte cache, but it fit extremely
well in a two megacache.
And so we got actually better
than twice the performance
and that's called superscalar.
So, why?
I use threads.
This is what I call
the shelf space theory.
The more things you have
scheduled and running out there,
the more CPU time you'll get.
So that's one way.
If there's two apps running
with the same priority,
then they'll both get
approximately 50-50% of the time.
If you've got three threads running
and there's only one other thread
running in the same priority,
then you're getting three
quarters of the time.
So it's kind of a cheesy
way to borrow more time.
No way I would ever do that.
So synchronous request,
talking about the spinning beach ball,
if you call an API in your event
loop and stall the processor
for whatever the time is,
all of a sudden you get the spinning
beach ball and your customer goes,
well, this isn't a very responsive app.
I don't like this one.
So you can put blocking calls
in your own thread and let the
main thread continue running,
dispatching events, updating the screen,
and let the user do what he wants to do.
And when the synchronous call finishes,
he can signal back to
the main thread that,
hey, I've finished doing this.
You can update the progress bar.
You can continue running on.
So polling is bad.
Another one of my favorite examples.
Anyone that's ever taken a
vacation with a nine-year-old,
this is the equivalent
of are we there yet?
Are we there yet?
And for me, bad is annoying.
So blocking is much better.
You get away from all the asynchronous
calls and playing with callbacks
and dealing with does it happen when
I thought it would and chaining events,
et cetera.
You can just put everything
in its own thread.
A good example of this was in,
I think it was 8.1 or so when we
actually went to the finder copy.
And once upon a time you do a
finder copy and you go get coffee
because it was only to do the copy.
When a very clever engineer,
I won't mention his name, it wasn't me.
I did say clever engineer, didn't I?
Wrote the asynchronous copy and
basically he chained all these
IO completion with this state machine.
It's about four pages of really
complicated code that gave you a headache
to even be in the same room with.
And it was really sweet and
everybody liked the fact that
you have multiple copies going on
and all this kind of fun stuff.
And that was great up until 8.6 came out.
And we took those four pages
of state machine and replaced
it with like six lines of code.
We spawn it off in another thread.
We do source file open,
destination file open, read from source,
write to the destination,
loop until the end of file,
close the source, close the destination,
done.
Pretty simple.
The only other thing going on with
all that was updating the progress
bar over in the finder and that
was all happening behind its back.
Very simple code, easy to maintain.
We let the interns do that.
So when to avoid threads.
So you want to avoid threads
when it adds complexity.
If you have global data in your
application that you're going to
share between multiple threads,
then you're going to
have to have locks on it.
And that can get,
you can introduce deadlock conditions
and so you've got to program
to prevent that and et cetera.
So global data requires locks.
If it's just shared,
it may not require locks.
If you've got one thread
that's only reading the data,
it may not require locking the data.
Other reason to avoid threads if
you have non-thread safe APIs.
Then there's alternatives.
We'll get to that.
added overhead,
it takes about 200 microseconds on
a dual gigahertz machine to create
a thread from the mako thread up.
And the preemption time is about
40 microseconds on a dual gig.
Now, interestingly enough,
I had the numbers for the new hardware,
but I couldn't put it in my slide
for what should be obvious reasons.
I couldn't rehearse to an audience that
hadn't been briefed on the new numbers.
So on the new box,
it's around 170 microseconds on
the creation and it's still exactly
40 microseconds on the new box
because the preemption has to save
twice the number of registers,
the width of the registers.
So I was pretty happy to break
even on the preemption time,
but we'll continue working,
hopefully bring that down some more.
The memory footprint.
Each stack that you create gets a 512.
12K virtual stack.
Obviously,
that's not using your physical,
but it will eat up your
virtual memory space.
And so you don't want to create a whole
bunch of threads and run out of memory.
Kernel Resources.
Every thread you create
is a Mac OS thread.
It has kernel resources
that we allocate to it.
The hardware context storage,
which is all those registers,
and I said 32 here,
but now it probably changes to 64.
About 2K per thread.
And that memory is physical and
it's locked down and so we want
to avoid using too many of that.
Hundreds of threads.
When I talked about the preemption
and the 40 microseconds,
that's a cumulative.
So if you've got thousands
of threads running,
you're going to probably spend as
much time preempting and switching
between all those threads as
running actually useful code.
So you don't want to get
crazy with inventing,
with spawning threads.
So other options, cooperative threads,
if you've got unthread safe APIs,
you can use the cooperative thread
manager and schedule those cooperatively.
You can use timers, Carbon timers,
Cocoa timers, et cetera,
to have tasks run at
predetermined intervals.
Threading architectures.
Parallel task with parallel I/O buffers.
An example of this would be if
you've got multiple independent
tasks that don't have really
that much to do with each other.
I think one of the very
first multiprocessing
projects I ever worked on,
I want to date myself, 20 years ago,
we were actually running
a driving simulator,
had an AI running all the cars,
and we had a physics engine
doing collision detection,
literally,
and then the Newtonian physics and
then the graphics rendering thread,
et cetera.
And when I tell people this, they said,
"Wow,
you guys were doing that 20 years ago?
That's pretty impressive."
And then I kind of qualify that.
We were doing about five minutes
worth of video in a month.
So things have progressed considerably.
No real time back then, or not much.
So it's real slow time.
Parallel task with shared I/O buffers.
Now this would be an example of where
you've got the same thing to do on a
lot of different pieces of data and
you can split it up into little pieces.
Like if you've got a graphics image and
you can like take little postage stamps
and feed each little postage stamp off
to a different processor or a different
task and they all do their crunching
and do everything to do and then put
them in the output buffer and put it
all back together on the other side.
And this is the best model for
dealing with exactly that case
and you typically want as many
tasks as there are processors.
Sequential task with
multiple I/O buffers.
I call this the pizza oven.
Some people call it the assembly line.
One of my other engineers in DTS wrote an
application that the first input buffer
was nothing more than some FS specs
that you got from a drag and drop.
The first task took the list of
FS specs and for each one found
if it was a file or a folder.
File or a folder.
If it was a folder,
it would feed it back in.
Or if it was a file,
it would send it to the
output of the first task.
If it was a folder,
it would iterate over everything and
then send each file to the output.
The second task would take this
iterated or unflattened list
of file specs and start reading
them in and streaming them out.
The next task would take the
data that's streaming through,
it would compress it and then the next
would send it over a network port.
And then et cetera, et cetera.
On the opposite side of the network,
it would uncompress it and then
it would unflatten it and then
it would create the directories.
And so it would basically do a
backup across the network and with
the compression and everything else,
we actually got better throughput
than most of the finder did doing
a flat uncompressed copy across.
But this is an example of a
sequential task where you're basically
doing one thing after another.
after another after
another to the same data.
Threading architectures.
Many applications have both parallel and
serial or sequential execution paths.
So it's basically everyone has to know
their app best and know which model
works best with what they're doing.
So word processor,
you could have a grammar or spell
check running independently of font,
texture, current rendering, et cetera.
So driving simulator,
like I mentioned earlier,
you could have AIs driving
the other cars.
Same time you got a
physics engine running,
same time you got a rendering
engine running that's
putting bits on the screen.
So implementations,
I'm not going to go into an
API account or anything like that.
Depending on which architecture
you prefer programming in,
there's thread implementations
in all of them.
Java has Java threads,
Carbon has NS threads,
and Cocoa has NS threads.
Oh, this is all mixed up.
They just wanted to see
if I was paying attention.
Okay.
And so you use the one that's
appropriate for your environment.
I have to say, having looked at the
implementation of these,
the top layers are extremely thin.
They're sitting right
on top of P threads.
So I wouldn't worry too much about the
overhead in that model and I wouldn't
go to P threads unless you really,
really, really, really want to.
So...
So the common concepts between
the different threading models
is basically thread management,
creating threads, destroying threads,
setting the thread priority or weight,
et cetera.
The synchronization primitives,
you got mutexes and semaphores and
queues and all the event groups,
et cetera, ways of communicating
between different threads.
And you've got thread safe services.
So this is like currently malloc
and the memory allocators,
the file I/O, the synchronous file
I/O are all thread safe,
et cetera.
So this is probably the most
important part of my talk,
the do's and the don'ts.
This is kind of a collection of
all the things that I ran into from
developers coming to me with issues and
sitting down and going over code and
figuring out why we're having problems.
So I mentioned earlier that 200
microsecond creation time can add
up if you're dynamically creating
and destroying a lot of threads.
So a good way to avoid that is
to preallocate and use pools.
Same thing with the memory and et cetera.
Try to be as data-driven as possible.
You want to write your code CPU-driven,
so you want to feed as much
data to it and have it ready
to go when you get ready to do.
Typically, this isn't a problem.
Most people write their code
in what I call this format.
They have a prologue
where they open files,
allocate memory, et cetera.
They crunch, crunch, crunch, crunch,
and when they're done,
they close their files,
dispose of memory, and release,
et cetera.
Some of the other implementations
on other operating systems for some
reason love doing the kill and the
cancel kind of things where they have
one thread stopping another thread.
Our system doesn't play well with
what I call asynchronous behavior.
We didn't design it that way
for good reasons and we really,
if you want to take advantage
of the way we do things,
you really want to avoid
using those kind of APIs.
When at all possible,
use the synchronization methods instead.
So use a mutex or semaphore, et cetera,
to control.
So when you use Semaphore
or UTX on a data structure,
you have to kind of achieve a balance
between having too many and too little.
If you have one big huge data tree
and you've only got one lock on it,
then the chances of someone
else needing that if you've got
multiple threads running is a lot
higher than if you do your locks
down in the branches of the tree.
So you don't want to lock everything
because you'll probably spend more
time locking and unlocking things
than actually accessing your data.
So there's a trick to
kind of find the balance.
Amen.
This is back again to are we there yet?
The void that's been waiting.
One of the common mistakes I see is
occasionally we'll have a developer that
wants to wait on two things at once.
And what they'll typically do is they'll
check one with a timeout and after the
timeout they'll check the other one
with a timeout and then they'll look
back and check the first one again.
And now they're basically still polling.
Are we there yet?
What you can do instead
is have two threads,
either thread waiting
on a different event,
different mutex,
and when either one of those
threads gets its signal,
it signals the third thread
that I've got my signal.
And so when he gets that signal,
that's the OR, he can continue.
If you're waiting on two things,
if you want both events to
happen before you continue,
then you can just block on
one and wait for it to finish.
And when it finishes,
go and block on the other one
and wait for it to finish.
And if the second one's already happened,
you'll just continue running.
So there's no reason to,
there's never a reason to poll.
GUI.
This is another one of those
areas I get a lot of questions on.
It seems like everybody
that ever jumps in,
the very first thing they want to
do is try to do some GUI things.
The good news is, I mean,
things are getting much better.
In the Mac OS 9 days,
it was just the definite don't.
Nowadays, we have Quartz.
You can draw output to the screen.
We have OpenGL.
You can output to the screen.
And if you're Carbon,
I'll pick on Carbon here.
If, like, for example,
you're doing that file copy and
you want to update a progress bar,
a real easy way to do that,
use post event to queue.
And that way you can tell
your main event thread,
update the progress bar.
So one nice thing about the
Carbon event model in particular is
I can send it 14 update events and it
doesn't put 14 events in the queue.
It's smart enough to know I've already
got an update event in the queue
and just leaves that one in there.
So you don't have to worry
about overflowing the queue.
So I've got a demo.
This will be the not-threaded version.
And you see the menus are dead.
I can't drag the menu down.
Oops, I could drag the menu down.
Finished.
I've got a threader running down in the
bottom so you could see what's going on.
We've got three threads.
I'll move my arrow down here.
Everybody can see that?
Okay.
So if I click here,
you'll see taking up all the CPU time
down in the main thread here.
[Transcript missing]
You can drag the window around.
Menus work.
And that's the behavior that
your users are going to expect.
So as you can tell,
there hasn't been a whole
lot of new information.
The best thing we can say is I think
you know what we've been working on.
We haven't broken anything
that we know about.
Everything that there works,
works the way it has pretty well and
hopefully we'll continue working on that.
I'll keep working on the
preemption time to get that down,
but other than that,
that's about the extent of it.
So hopefully we'll cover anything
else you want to know in the Q&As.
So thank you.
So just to give you a wrap
up of some of the sessions,
the Kernel Extension Programming
Techniques,
that was on Monday,
so on the DVD you'll be able
to get the opportunity to
take a look at that session.
For contacts, George Warner and DTS.
You may already be familiar with
George through your contacts
and email and myself as a
desktop hardware evangelist.
Let's go ahead and start
Q&A and invite a few folks up.